feat(0013): Add initial version of configuration migration EIP (#46)
emqx/eip: active/0013-configuration-migration.md

# Data import and export using Mnesia backups

## Change log

* 2021-09-09: @k32 Initial draft

## Abstract

Backup and restore of database tables and configuration should be used for the cluster upgrade.
This procedure should replace the JSON configuration dumps.

## Motivation

> Upgrading the EMQ X cluster between major releases requires redeployment of the cluster.

Reviewer: actually minor releases too.

Currently runtime data is migrated by dumping it to a JSON file and importing it as described here:
https://docs.emqx.io/en/broker/v4.3/advanced/data-import-and-export.html#data-import-and-export

Encoding Erlang terms to JSON and decoding them back is a manual error-prone process.
We propose to use binary dumps instead, starting from EMQ X 5.0.

## Design

A new `emqx_metadata` mnesia table should be added.
Mnesia has a checkpoint feature that can be used to perform a backup.

> TODO: decide the best way to include data from the external databases (MySQL, MongoDB, etc.) to the backup.

Reviewer: that's probably out of the scope of this proposal

This approach solves several problems:

1. The upgrade code can work with mnesia tables directly, using the regular data access layer APIs
1. The upgrade code can perform potentially destructive operations with the data without risk of affecting the running applications
1. The upgrade code can load beams files without affecting the running system

The offline upgrade process can be started manually via a script, or automatically from the main EMQ X process when data import API is called.
This process should load all the `beam` files that the regular EMQ X uses, but it won't start any of the applications.

Steps of the offline migration process:

1. Start `data_migration` application in a separate BEAM VM
1. Run upgrade hooks
1. If the previous step succeeds, create another backup using the standard procedure
1. Stop the temporary BEAM VM
1. Import the backup to the EMQ X cluster

#### Upgrade hooks

There should be an Erlang module called `emqx_upgrade` that collects all upgrade hooks.

```erlang
-module(emqx_upgrade).

-export([upgrade_hooks/0]).

upgrade_hooks() ->
   %% Num | Intruduced in release | Function

>     [ {100, "5.1.0",                fun upgrade_lib_baz/2}

Reviewer: if this is to be compared, maybe a tuple instead?
i.e. `"5.1.0"` -> `{5, 1, 0}`

    , {99,  "5.0.1",                fun lib_bar:upgrade_lib_bar/2}
    , {98,  "5.0.0",                fun lib_foo:upgrade_lib_foo/2}
    ...
    ].

upgrade_lib_baz(_From, _To = "5.1.0") ->
  mnesia:transform_table(...).
```

Every upgrade hook definition contains the following fields:

1. A strictly decreasing number of the upgrade hook
1. Version of EMQ X release where this upgrade hook has been introduced, non-increasing
1. Reference to the upgrade hook.
   All the upgrade hooks should be immutable: once they are written, they shouldn't change

There should be a separate module that works with the upgrade hooks, called `emqx_upgrade_helper`.

It has the following functions:

> 1. `init()`, where it creates an internal metadata table that contains `data_version` record that contains the EMQ X release version corresponding to the currently loaded configuration and runtime data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `init()`, where it creates the internal metadata table `emqx_metadata` which contains `data_version` record that contains the EMQ X release version corresponding to the currently loaded configuration and runtime data.
```

   This function is called during fresh installation of EMQ X
1. `check()`, where it loads `emqx_upgrade` module and verifies the following properties:
   1. List of the upgrade hooks is sorted by `num` and `introduced_in` fields
   1. The largest `introduced_in` field is lesser or equal to the EMQ X release version

   This function can be called in CI to test the upgrade code
1. `upgrade()` that performs data migration.
   It performs the following steps:
   1. Load the latest version of `emqx_upgrade` module
   1. Filter out all the upgrade hooks with `introduced in` lesser than the current `data_version` and `num` lesser then the `last_upgrade_hook` record in `emqx_metadata` table, if present
   1. Execute the hooks obtained on the previous step.
      If the hook ran successfully, update `last_upgrade_hook` counter.
      If `introduced_in` field of the _next_ update hook is larger than the current version, then insert the _current_ version to `emqx_metadata` table

#### REST API

Management API should be extended with two methods:

```bash

> $ curl -i --basic -u admin:public -X POST "http://localhost:8081/api/v4/data/backup"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ curl -i --basic -u admin:public -X POST "http://localhost:8081/api/v5/data/backup"
```
